# C ports of PL/M 80 and Fortran applications

This repository contains my ports of several PL/M 80 applications to C and my port of the old Fortran based PL/M80 compiler, again to C.

There is also a historical port of the ISIS-II PL/M 80 compiler to C++, directly done from the disassembled code, i.e. before I reversed engineered the compiler into PL/M 80 source.

Originally the code was distributed as part of my [Intel80Tools](https://github.com/ogdenpm/intel80tools) repository, however I have refactored into its own repository as a cleaner option, as the number of ports increases. Prebuilt Windows 32bit binaries of these tools (except the historic C++ port) are still distributed as part of the [Intel80Tools](https://github.com/ogdenpm/intel80tools) repository. 

See the doc directory for information on each of the applications, including usage differences from the original applications.

Visual studio solution files are provided for all the tools,  along Linux Makefiles.

Note if you get a warning message when building  files, it may be because you are using an older or possibly newer version than I have set the project to. Visual Studio provides simple options to retarget to any version you have.

There are also a three of script files from my [versionTools](https://github.com/ogdenpm/versionTools) repository in the Scripts directory. Of these getVersion.cmd and getVersion.pl are the main ones that creates the version numbers. The other install.cmd is used to auto install Windows executables to your desired directory. This can be replaced with your own installation scripts. For Linux all the built files can be found in the subdirectory Linux/Install, from here you can install to your required directory.



## Recent major changes

### 30-May-2023

#### ASM80

- The macro file is now simulated in memory, removing the external file.
- The underbar character is now accepted within labels
- Macro and Line buffers now auto grow as required.
- The combined length of nested macro arguments has been increased to 4096 and the arguments now grow upwards in memory rather than down. Changing to support dynamic growth would require many changes so the simpler option is to allocate a large array.
- Code has been added to replicate the format of the object file to match the original assembler, provided no label > 6 chars is used.
- The header lines have been modified to reflect that they are no longer ISIS-II and to enable long module names to be centred in the available space.
- The optional MACROFILE drive can be entered but it is not checked and is ignored.
- Some redundant functions and variables have been removed. Additionally some previously defined global variables have been made static, or function level variables.
- I have increased the size of the token stack to 20, this will allow longer db/dw lines
- The checking of whether a viable is local has been improved. Now only labels of the form ??nnnn, where nnnn is a auto generated four digit decimal number, are considered local.

#### Other changes

Some of the Windows build has been fixed. Certain configurations broke when I added Linux support.

### 19-May-2023

- Labels up to 31 characters are now supported and as per PL/M embedded $ can be used in labels and numbers to make them easier to read. The $ is excluded from the name. Symbol listings, xref listings and object files all support the longer length variables.

- In order to support the changes the symbol table now holds a pointer to a C string rather than a packed double word. Related to this the symbol table memory management has been modified.

  - A maximum of 8192 symbols are supported.

  - ~~The maximum combined length of nested parameters is currently 1024 characters (+ length bytes)~~

  - ~~The maximum line length of macro body is currently 512 bytes~~

  - The keyword table has been modified to use a hash table generated by gperf.

    If you get table errors let me know.

- ~~Due to the longer labels, I have had to make some changes to the checks on when to generate a new OMF85 record. The original made an assumption that the names were up to 6 characters. A consequence of this is that symbol splits across records may be different. The generated object files will be equivalent.~~

- With the extended label name, it is possible that some old code will generate undefined errors. This is because in the original the names were truncated to 6 characters instead of 31, e.g. RESTART and RESTAR will be the same on the original assembler but flag an error now.

- I have re-enabled MACROFILE, which defaults to on. To turn off use the NOMACROFILE option. This will allow reserved names to be used for older code.
  ~~Note support for the optional (drive), has been removed and if used will generate an error.~~

### 16-May-2023

I have done the first part of a major rework of asm80, the key changes are noted below. If you find any problems please let me know.

- The I/O has been significantly reworked to use stdio buffering including adding support for Linux/Unix files. This has allowed most of the internal buffering code used in the original PL/M to be removed. For now some buffering around macros remains, but the underlying I/O has been modified. The changes also considerably simplify the handling of nested include files
- Related to the above, most of the error messages now use native error messages and write to stderr.
- The intermediate file required for xref support has been eliminated.
- The intermediate file currently still used for macro processing, now uses a system allocated temporary file, enabling the support for parallel invocation of asm80.
- Limits on the command line length have been removed as have limits on the source line length, however for listing purposes very long lines are truncated.
- Native filenames, including directory paths are now supported up to a limit of 260 characters. The change also supports the  use of a :Fx: prefix (x is 1-9), which is replaced with the value of the associated environment variable :Fx: if it exists, otherwise the empty string is used.
  Note filenames including the directory path cannot include spaces or the ')' character. By using the :Fx: prefix it is possible to work around this for the directory path. The 260 character limit can also be resolved using the same technique if the OS supports longer paths.
- Support for ISIS devices e.g. :CO: and :BB: has been removed. Native equivalents can be used or for :BB: by using the NO option prefix.
- For the auto generated default .lst and .obj files a check is made on whether the file name part is upper case only. If it is then uppercase extensions .LST and .OBJ are used instead.
- The MACROFILE option is disabled as it is no longer needed. All assembly is done with macros enabled and the use of a system temporary file.
  Note, although previously undocumented, as the assembler always uses the macro version the key words macro and local, cannot be used as standard labels.
- Option MOD85 is now set by default. |The NO prefix for MOD85 is now supported to allow 8080 mode to be set.
- Initial work has been done to remove dependencies on packed structure support and little endian data formats. Further checking is required to check for missed changes.
- A number of preliminary changes have been made, pending support for names up to 31 characters to match PL/M.

### 6-May-2023

- Fixed sequence point issue with asm80. The compiler legally swapped lhs and rhs for an & operation, but this had unexpected side effects.
- asm80 & plm80c now support le endian processors
  Note as the old C++ port of pl/m is depreciated, I do not intend to make it portable across non le endian processors. It does however now support build on C++17 and later.

### 4-May-2023

- I have replaced the versioning model with one that is simpler to generate. A description can be found in the document Scripts/versionTools.pdf.
- Related to the above I have standardised the inclusion of supplementary version information and it's display. Details can be found in Scripts/showVersion.pdf
- I have modified the licence information to reflect original owners and that the code is released for hobbyist use and academic interest.
- Linux build support has been added. To avoid source tree pollution, a separate directory Linux has been added. Within this are subdirectories one for each application. Whilst each application can be built individually, the Makefile in the Linux directory can be used to build all the applications.
  The Makefiles assume gnu make is being used and the use of the -j  (parallel builds) is supported.
  As I test using WSL on Windows, due to performance issues of git access from WSL to Windows, the default build does not force a version check or timestamp. In development this is ok, for release the publish target can be used to force the check.
-  A number of bugs were identified by Andrey Hlus and have been fixed. Thanks Andrey.
- The code has been significantly modified to allow clean builds with gcc -Wall and cl /W3.
  Note using cl /W4 creates lots of  additional minor warnings which I have checked. Most of the warnings are about assigning a larger integer to a smaller one, adding the explicit casts would make the code much harder to read.
  Also note cl /Wall generates lots of additional information, e.g. which functions are in-lined.
- binobj, hexobj, lib, link, locate and objhex should now work on non little endian processors, let me know if you find problems. The work on fixing asm80 and plm80c has started.
- tex has been modified to work on Linux, although care is needed to ensure file names are the correct case on the command line and within tex input. The changes which impact Windows and Linux are
  - On the command line only a - can also be used as the parameter marker instead of $. This avoids shell expansion under Linux. I suggest avoiding filenames starting with $ or - to avoid any confusion.
  - getch, which is used during paging, now only enters raw input whilst getting the single character. This hopefully will  allow console input during tex processing to use standard line handling.
  - kbhit has been stubbed. Both operating systems support control C to abort a program. Although this does not give the opportunity to continue, entering control C is unlikely to be accidental.
    A limitation on this is when using a key hit to pause output to a printer to say handle a paper jam. As modern printer interfaces are usually spooled, direct printer output will be uncommon. If it  does occur, run tex with the $I command to start output from a given page.

------

```
Updated by Mark Ogden 4-May-2023
```
